Hibernate projection inside Hibernate with Panache (#8563)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/hibernate-orm-panache.adoc

Every query operation accepts passing parameters by index (`Object...`), or by name (`Map<String,Object>` or `Parameters`).

=== Query projection

Query projection can be done with the `project(Class)` method on the `PanacheQuery` object that is returned by the `find()` methods.

You can use it to restrict which fields will be returned by the database.

Hibernate will use **DTO projection** and generate a SELECT clause with the attributes from the projection class.

> This is also called **dynamics instanciation** or **constructor expression**, more info can be found on the Hibernate guide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is also called **dynamic instantiation** or **constructor expression**, more info can be found on the Hibernate guide:
```

link:https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/current/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html#hql-select-clause[hql select clause]

The projection class needs to be a valid Java Bean and have a constructor that contains all its attributes, this constructor will be used to

> instantiate the projection DTO instead of using the entity class. This must be the only constructor of the class.

Reviewer: Why? What happens if there are more?

Author: I took the first one.
If there are more, we will need a way to know which one to choose to build the select clause.
We can do it by adding an annotation to denote the correct constructor, but I prefere to keep it simple for the moment and only allow one constructor.
I can add a check in the code and fail if there is more than one constructor
We can revisit this later if needed.

Reviewer: OK fine.

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.runtime.annotations.RegisterForReflection;

@RegisterForReflection // <1>
public class PersonName {

>     private String name;

Reviewer: Can't we turn this into a public final field?

Author: Hibernate documentation said that the class must be a Java Bean.
I just tested it and it can be a POJO with public fields.
I'll update the documentation as this is more consistent with what we do in other areas.

Reviewer: Cool

    public PersonName(String name){ // <2>
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getName(){
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String name){
        this.name = name;
    }
}

// only 'name' will be loaded from the database
PanacheQuery<PersonName> query = Person.find("status", Status.Alive).project(PersonName.class);
----

1. If you plan to deploy your application as a native executable, you must register manually the projection class for reflection.
2. This constructor will be used by Hibernate, it must be the only constructor in your class and have all the class attributes as parameters.

[WARNING]
====

> The implementation of the `project(Class)` method use constructor parameter names to build the select clause of the query,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation of the `project(Class)` method uses the constructor's parameter names to build the select clause of the query,
```

so the compiler must be configured to store parameter names inside the compiled class.

> This is enabled by default if you are using the Quarkus Maven archetype, if not add the property `<maven.compiler.parameters>true</maven.compiler.parameters>` to your pom.xml.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is enabled by default if you are using the Quarkus Maven archetype. If you are not using it, add the property `<maven.compiler.parameters>true</maven.compiler.parameters>` to your pom.xml.
```

====

[WARNING]
====

> Using `project(Class)` will update the JPA query, so you must use the other methods that update the query (like withLock, withHint, page, ...) after it.

Reviewer: If it updates the query (mutate) then order doesn't matter. I think what you mean is that it will create a new query. In either case order should not matter because the query copy can use settings from the original query, no?

Author: See my next comment. I think some refactoring needs to be done to mitigate this.
